# iResearch-2024 - Rowan Shenoy
## Essential Questions #1

### Question 1 - What is Natural Language Processing?

Natural language processing (NLP) is a a classification of artificial intelligence models that aims to "[bridge] the gap between human language and machines". Different NLP algorithms focus on different language processing problems ranging from identifying the modd of a sentence to generating full paragraphs of text based off of a human provided prompt. Machines (unlike humans) run off of numbers and math so in order to have machines be able to process human language each sentence must be segmented and the machine must convert the similarity of words and the context of words into a series of matrices or vectors. Conversion into matrices or vectors makes it easier for the machine to not only process the input text but also understand it and then output similar text or answer a question in a prompt.

### Question 2 - What are the core aspects of NLP?

NLPs are used to solve a wide variety of software engineering or data science problems. The uses inlude classifying the grammatical purpose of words in a sentence, filling in missing words in a sentence based off of context, answering a question based off of information provided in a prompt, translation, or summarization of a text. Generally, NLP algorithms work by having a series of attention layers which are separated into a encoder model and a decoder model. In the ecoder model, the attention layers are set up to focus on specific words that may be important. For example, in translation, a verb congugation would be reliant on the subject and the tense so both would be considered important. Once the endoer model identifies important words or phrases, the decoder model makes sense of the important information and then outputs the desired result.

### Question 3 - What are some real-world applications of NLP?

Currently, NLP has not been used for anything other than chatbots or code completion. Right now, I'm writing in Visual Studio code and as I write this, GitHub Copilot is actively trying to figure out what I'm typing and suggest the next word. The following is word for word what Copilot suggested to me, "This is a form of NLP. Chatbots are also a form of NLP. They take in a prompt and then output a response. The chatbot may be trained to respond to a specific prompt or it may be trained to respond to a wide variety of prompts. In the future, NLP may be used to generate full paragraphs of text based off of a prompt or to summarize a text. This would be useful for students who are trying to write a paper or for a journalist who is trying to write a news article." To me, NLPs are the future of software engineering and data science. They allow for average people the ability to write code or text without needing to have any prior knowledge. This is a huge step forward in the world of technology and I'm excited to see where it goes.

### Question 4 - What are the limitations and challenges of NLP?

Since human language is so complex, NLP algorithms are not always able to fully understand it. In human language, there are a lot of "ambiguities" that make the connotations of the sentence or phrase different from the denotation. Contextual ambigities fall into this category because of sarcasm, metaphore, and other figures of speech. Other ambiguties like lexical and semantic scope ambigities as well as emojis/emoticons that have multiple different meanings depending on the reader, the capitalization, and context. Human error also contributes to the limitations of NLP algorithms since if a human makes a typo or has poor grammar then an algorithm trained on a dataset with perfect grammar or perfect spelling would not be able to process certain sentences or words.

With the rise of NLP technologies in our everyday lives like ChatGPT from OpenAI and Copilot from Microsoft (partnered with OpenAI), a growing number of people are concerned with the ethical implications of NLP technologies in education and in the workplace. Modern NLP technologies are now able to answer questions from AP and IB tests, standardized admissions tests, and even write college level essays simulating the user's writing style. Many fear that if NLP algorithms continue to be used in education that students won't be learning or understanding material while getting the grades of a student that does understand the material without the use of artificial intelligence. Ethical concerns regarding AI is not limited to the use but also the training. Specifically, people have raised concerns about companies using biased datasets for facial recognition AI or even biased datasets for NLP. In the past, it was found that some word embeddings had gender stereotyped/gender biased datasets.
